Add specs for Email consent opt-in and Unsubscribe page (#3110)
mozilla/pontoon: specs/0117-email-opt-in-unsubscribe.md

- Feature Name: Email consent opt-in and Unsubscribe page
- Created: 2024-02-21
- Associated Issue: #3109

# Summary

Work required to enable email communication with Pontoon users: opt-in consent user settings, methods for collecting user opt-in, unsubscribe method via a single page that doesn't require login.

# Motivation

There does not exist currently an email communication consent opt-in for users who register with Pontoon. This restricts our ability to reach contributors outside of the platform and reduces our effectiveness in keeping localizers informed and engaged. So we need to create settings that allow users to control their ability to opt in to email messages.

This will allow us to reach out within legal compliance to the wider audience of registered users for things such as surveys, online events, etc. Future major platform enhancements will be able to build off this work, and starting this early will provide enough time to ensure interested and active contributors are opted-in ahead of time.

Value for users / problems solved:
- Users can select their preference for email communication

> - Engagement/reach expanded beyond logged-in active Pontoon users

Author: I've revised a bit to provide a more accurate statement.

# Feature explanation

> ## Email communication user settings

Reviewer: Are we going to include mockups in the spec?

Author: I created *very* rough mock ups for the opt-in consents for new and existing users.

Reviewer: Thanks, these are very helpful! I think we should streamline the copy on these pages to make the CTA stand out more.

I'm happy to take a stab at that and work on the missing mockups (we should have one at least for the Unsubscribe page).

> The email opt-in consent option is available under an “Email communications” option in user preferences. “Contact email address” should be moved from Personal information to under this section and an option for non-transactional mass emails opt-ing should be added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The email opt-in consent option is available under the new “Email communications” section in user settings. “Contact email address” is moved from the “Personal information“ section to this section.
```

These user email communication preferences are stored and referenced in database to determine if emails should be sent to the user.

(Section: content)
- Section title: `Email communications`
- Input field: Contact email address
- Subtitle of input: `If provided, this email address will be used for email communications and will appear under your Profile page instead of the email used for login.`

> - Check box: `Receive updates related to localization at Mozilla, projects on Pontoon, and updates to the Pontoon platform.`

Reviewer: Please add a note somewhere that all texts need to be configurable per instance, i.e. we should not be hard-coding "Mozilla".

Author: I added it here where you indicated, but let me know if this should be included somewhere else.

- Subtitle to check box: `I’m okay with Mozilla handling my personal information as explained in this <a href="https://www.mozilla.org/privacy/websites/">Privacy Notice</a>.`

## Standalone page for email consent shown after existing user login

We need to make existing users aware of the new email communication preference.

Upon login (after a user’s previous session expires) an email consent page should be displayed to existing users logging in for the first time after the consent feature is enabled. 

They should be shown two buttons, one to opt in to emails or one declining to opt in. This should not be shown again if the user clicks either of the buttons, but should be shown again upon next login if the user closed their tab/browser.

This page also should not be shown if the user has already opted in via their settings.

(Section: content)
- Header: `Update your email communication preferences`

> - Sub-header: `You can now choose your email communication preferences within Pontoon.`

Reviewer: Are these texts ours or do we need to verify them with legal? I'd encourage users to opt in more actively.

Author: This is great feedback (ideally would like to get this feedback during the earlier review phase). 

I've updated the content for both the new and existing user opt-in page. Flagging @flodolo for visibility.

- Body: `Would you like to receive updates related to localization at Mozilla, projects on Pontoon, and updates to the Pontoon platform?`
- Consent: `By enabling email updates, I’m okay with Mozilla handling my personal information as explained in this <a href="https://www.mozilla.org/privacy/websites/">Privacy Notice</a>.`

> - Button: `Enable email updates`
> - Button: `No, thank you`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Primary button: `Enable email updates`
- Secondary button: `No, thank you`
```

> - Body: `You can update your email communication preferences at any time in your settings.`

Reviewer: Perhaps we should put these into a mockup? "Body", "Consent" and another "Body" don't really tell much.

*Display if user logged in:*
- Button: `Enable email updates`
- Consent: `By enabling email updates, I’m okay with Mozilla handling my personal information as explained in this <a href="https://www.mozilla.org/privacy/websites/">Privacy Notice</a>.`

## Unsubscribe page

Legal regulations (e.g. CAN-SPAM act) have specific requirements to include an unsubscribe link in commercial email messages to manage email preferences without requiring a login.

As a user I can:
- Access my unique/personal unsubscribe page through a link without logging in. The link would typically be included with non-transactional emails from Pontoon as an “Unsubscribe” link in the footer.
  - Link technical specs:
  1) Pontoon generates a random unique identifier and assigns it to each user. The algorithm doesn't use any existing user data to generate the ID, which needs to be sufficiently complex to avoid a potential attacker guessing.
  2) The unsubscribe page can be accessed without login. If a user ID is not provided, or it's incorrect, it will display an error message.
  3) Unsubscribe links in emails will include the user's unique identifier in the URL to correctly identify the user.

> - All options are managed from a single page; I do not need to navigate from the page linked in the email to manage subscriptions.

Reviewer: This doesn't work well with "As a user I can:".

- Unsubscribe from all emails with a single button.
- Subscribe for emails with a single button.

> - Receive a confirmation that I have successfully unsubscribed/subscribed. I am also instructed how to change my subscriptions later through my user preferences.

Reviewer: I think we can drop all of this, because it is presented with more detail below. Before I saw the actual copy below, I was confused by these bullet points (e.g. why would I want to subscribe on the unsubscribe page, how exactly am I instructed, etc.).

> - (In future implementations) Select specific categories of emails to receive / no longer receive. 

Reviewer: This should not be part of the spec.

(Section: content)
 - Title: `Mozilla Localization - Pontoon`
 - Header: `Update Your Email Preferences`
 - Body: `Thank you for contributing to localization at Mozilla. Please use the form below if you would like to stop receiving email updates related to localization at Mozilla, projects on Pontoon, and updates to the Pontoon platform.`
 - Radio button: `Please unsubscribe from all Mozilla localization emails.`

>  - Radio button: `Please keep me sending me emails from Mozilla localization.`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Radio button: `Please keep sending me emails from Mozilla localization.`
```

The ability to opt in to non-transactional email communications does not currently exist for users who register with Pontoon. This restricts our ability to reach contributors outside of the platform and reduces our effectiveness in keeping localizers informed and engaged. So we need to create settings that allow users to control their ability to opt in to email messages.

This will allow us to reach out within legal compliance to the wider audience of registered users for things such as surveys, online events, etc. Future major platform enhancements can build off this work, and starting early will provide enough time to ensure interested and active contributors are opted-in ahead of time.

Value for users / problems solved:
- Users can select their preference for email communication
- Engagement/reach expanded beyond logged-in active Pontoon users that respects user preferences and complies with legal requirements

# Feature explanation

## Email communication user settings

The email opt-in consent option is available under the new “Email communications” option in user settings. “Contact email address” is moved from the "Personal information" section to this section.

> These user email communication preferences are stored and referenced in database to determine if emails should be sent to the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These user email communication preferences are stored and referenced in the database to determine if emails should be sent to the user.
```

(Section: content)
- Section title: `Email communications`
- Input field: Contact email address
- Subtitle of input: `If provided, this email address will be used for email communications and will appear under your Profile page instead of the email used for login.`
- Check box: `Receive updates related to localization at Mozilla, projects on Pontoon, and updates to the Pontoon platform.`
- Subtitle to check box: `I’m okay with Mozilla handling my personal information as explained in this <a href="https://www.mozilla.org/privacy/websites/">Privacy Notice</a>.`

Note: All texts need to configurable per instance, i.e. we should not be hard-coding "Mozilla".

## Standalone page for email opt-in consent shown after existing user login

We need to make existing users aware of the new email communication preference.

Upon accessing Pontoon for the first time after the feature is enabled, an email opt-in consent page is displayed to existing users.

> The user selects their preference by clicking one of two buttons, one to opt in to emails or one declining to opt in. This page is not shown again if the user clicks either of the buttons. The page is shown again if the user navigates away from the page without clicking either of the buttons.

Author: I'm updating this as "visit" - @mathjazz seems to indicate that it wouldn't trigger if a link is opened in a new tab, only when opened from the urlbar - please let me know if there's more precise wording that can be used here/

- Sub-header: `Stay connected with the latest updates from Mozilla localization`
- Unordered list: `Subscribe to emails to receive updates about:`
- List item: `What’s happening in localization at Mozilla`
- List item: `Invitations to events for contributors and surveys`
- List item: `Announcements and changes about projects happening on Pontoon`
- List item: `Changes and updates to the Pontoon platform`
- Sub-header: `Click below to subscribe now`
- Body: `Would you like to receive updates related to localization at Mozilla, projects on Pontoon, and updates to the Pontoon platform? This can be changed at any time in your settings.`
- Subtitle: `You can update your email communication preferences at any time in your settings.`
- Button: `No, thank you`
- Button (primary): `Enable email updates`
- Consent: `By enabling email updates, I’m okay with Mozilla handling my personal information as explained in this <a href="https://www.mozilla.org/privacy/websites/">Privacy Notice</a>.`

## Additional card for tour

As part of new user onboarding, we point new users to user preferences and call out the ability to enable email communication preferences.

(Section: content)

> - Header: `Stay up to date`

Author: "Always" here is a bit redundant as "Stay" already implies that, alternates:
Keep up to date
Stay up to date with the latest
Get the latest updates

> - Header: `Stay up to date`

Reviewer 2: I like "Keep up to date", more dynamic.

- Body: `You can receive updates related to localization at Mozilla, projects on Pontoon, and updates to the Pontoon platform by email. If you'd like to stay up to date, you can enable these emails in your settings.`

*Display if user logged in:*
- Button: `Enable email updates`
- Consent: `By enabling email updates, I’m okay with Mozilla handling my personal information as explained in this <a href="https://www.mozilla.org/privacy/websites/">Privacy Notice</a>.`

## Unsubscribe page

Legal regulations (e.g. CAN-SPAM act) have specific requirements to include an unsubscribe link in commercial email messages to manage email preferences without requiring a login.

As a user I can:

> - Access my unique/personal unsubscribe page through a link without logging in. The link is typically included with non-transactional emails from Pontoon as an “Unsubscribe” link in the footer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Access my unique/personal unsubscribe page through a link without logging in. The link is typically included with non-transactional emails from Pontoon as an `Unsubscribe` link in the footer.
```

  - Link technical specs:
  1) Pontoon generates a random unique identifier and assigns it to each user. The algorithm doesn't use any existing user data to generate the ID, which needs to be sufficiently complex to avoid a potential attacker guessing.

>   2) The unsubscribe page can be accessed without login. If a user ID is not provided, or it's incorrect, it will display an error message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  2) The unsubscribe page can be accessed without login. If a user ID is not provided, or it's incorrect, it will display an error message: `User ID not valid. If you copied and pasted the link from an email, make sure to include all characters.`.
```

I think it's worth adding the actual text here in the specs.

Author: Thanks. I think we should avoid calling this a User ID and just say the URL is invalid.

  3) Unsubscribe links in emails will include the user's unique identifier in the URL to correctly identify the user.
- Access all options from a single page; I do not need to navigate from the page linked in the email to manage subscriptions.

(Section: content)
 - Title: `Mozilla Localization - Pontoon`
 - Header: `Update Your Email Preferences`
 - Body: `Thank you for contributing to localization at Mozilla. Please use the form below if you would like to stop receiving email updates related to localization at Mozilla, projects on Pontoon, and updates to the Pontoon platform.`

>  - Radio button: `Please unsubscribe from all Mozilla localization emails.`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - Radio button: `Please unsubscribe me from all Mozilla localization emails.`
```

?

Reviewer 2: We need to specify which radio option is automatically selected. On the other hand, what about a checkbox, automatically selected, with this text as a label?

 - Radio button: `Please keep sending me emails from Mozilla localization.`
 - Button: `Submit`

>  - On submit alert (Unsubscribe): `You've successfully unsubscribed. You can update your preferences anytimes from your <a href="https://pontoon.mozilla.org/settings/">settings</a>.`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - On submit alert (Unsubscribe): `You've successfully unsubscribed. You can update your preferences anytimes from your <a href="https://pontoon.mozilla.org/settings/">settings</a> (make sure that you're logged in to access this page).`
```

>  - On submit alert (Subscribe): `Thanks! You will continue to receive emails from Mozilla localization. You can update your preferences anytimes from your <a href="https://pontoon.mozilla.org/settings/">settings</a>.`

Reviewer 2: If we go the checkbox route, we could have a message like "If you don't want to unsubscribe, or you have clicked the link by mistake, you can close this page and we will make no changes to your settings.`.

- Feature Name: Email opt-in consent and Unsubscribe page
- Created: 2024-02-21
- Associated Issue: #3109

# Summary

Work required to enable email communication with Pontoon users: opt-in consent user settings, methods for collecting user opt-in, unsubscribe method via a single page that doesn't require login.

# Motivation

The ability to opt in to non-transactional email communications does not currently exist for users who register with Pontoon. This restricts our ability to reach contributors outside of the platform and reduces our effectiveness in keeping localizers informed and engaged. So we need to create settings that allow users to control their ability to opt in to email messages.

This will allow us to reach out within legal compliance to the wider audience of registered users for things such as surveys, online events, etc. Future major platform enhancements can build off this work, and starting early will provide enough time to ensure interested and active contributors are opted-in ahead of time.

Value for users / problems solved:
- Users can select their preference for email communication

> - Engagement/reach expanded beyond logged-in active Pontoon users that respects user preferences and complies with legal requirements

Author: I reflected both comments since the points they raise are both true.

- Feature Name: Email consent opt-in and Unsubscribe page
- Created: 2024-02-21
- Associated Issue: #3109

# Summary

> Work required to enable email communication with Pontoon users: opt-in consent user settings, methods for collecting user opt-in, and an unsubscribe page via a single page without logging in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Work required to enable email communication with Pontoon users: opt-in consent user settings, methods for collecting user opt-in, unsubscribe method via a single page that doesn't require login.
```

Value for users / problems solved:
- Users can select their preference for email communication
- Engagement/reach expanded beyond logged-in active Pontoon users

# Feature explanation

## Email communication user settings

The email opt-in consent option is available under an “Email communications” option in user preferences. “Contact email address” should be moved from Personal information to under this section and an option for non-transactional mass emails opt-ing should be added.

These user email communication preferences are stored and referenced in database to determine if emails should be sent to the user.

(Section: content)
- Section title: “Email communications”
- Input field: Contact email address
- Subtitle of input: “If provided, this email address will be used for email communications and will appear under your Profile page instead of the email used for login.”
- Check box: “Receive updates related to localization at Mozilla, projects on Pontoon, and updates to the Pontoon platform.”

> - Consent: “I’m okay with Mozilla handling my personal information as explained in this <a href="https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/privacy/websites/">Privacy Notice</a>."

Reviewer 2: What does "Consent" mean here? Is it a subtitle to the checkbox?

> ## Standalone page for email consent shown after existing user log-in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Standalone page for email consent shown after existing user login
```

We need to make existing users aware of the new email communication preference.

> Upon login (after a user’s previous session expires) an email consent page should be displayed to existing users logging in for the first time after the consent feature is enabled. 

Reviewer 2: Why do we need to wait for a new login? That seems an unnecessary delay.

Author: See my above comment for my reasoning.

Reviewer: I would also do it immediately. It would give results and let us catch any issues faster. It's also what most other sites do.

I'm not too concerned about the page loading in multiple tabs. It could only happen if you open tabs from the URL bar, after the feature ships and before you resolve the page in one of them.

Author: Based on this feedback, I've revised to @mathjazz suggestion.

> They should be shown two buttons, one to opt-in to emails or one declining to opt-in. This should not be shown again if the user clicks either of the buttons, but should be shown again upon next login if the user closed their tab/browser.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They should be shown two buttons, one to opt in to emails or one declining to opt in. This should not be shown again if the user clicks either of the buttons, but should be shown again upon next login if the user closed their tab/browser.
```

Why do we need to wait for the next login, and not display the dialog the next time they load Pontoon?

Author: This could be an implementation detail to check with @mathjazz - but if we show it to them the next time they load Pontoon - does that also mean each time I open a page in a different tab would cause me to be redirected to the consent page? 

I felt doing it on login would be less disruptive to workflows. Since users have to login at least every 2 weeks and the login process forces them out of their workflow already, asking them at that time would encourage more consideration and could potentially improve conversion. (That being said its just a hypothesis and not tested, mostly based on my own personal views.)

Reviewer 2: That's a good point, it can become invasive and they will just dismiss it without much thought.

> This page also should not be shown if the user has opted-in via their settings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This page also should not be shown if the user has already opted in via their settings.
```

This might be unnecessary if we decide to show the dialog after enabling the feature, without waiting for a new login.

(Section: content)
- Header: "Update your email communication preferences"
- Sub-header: "You can now choose your email communication preferences within Pontoon."

> - Body: "Would you like to receive updates related to localization at Mozilla, projects on Pontoon, and updates to the Pontoon platform by email?”

Reviewer 2: …updates **about** the Pontoon platform?

> - Consent: “By enabling email updates, I’m okay with Mozilla handling my personal information as explained in this <a href="https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/privacy/websites/">Privacy Notice</a>."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Consent: “By enabling email updates, I’m okay with Mozilla handling my personal information as explained in this <a href="https://www.mozilla.org/privacy/websites/">Privacy Notice</a>."
```

Fix applies across the document.

- Button: "Enable email updates”
- Button: "No, thank you"
- Body: “You can update your email communication preferences at any time in your settings."

## New account creation email opt-in

Ideally, we would like users to set up their email communication preferences right away upon successful account creation.

> After a user successfully creates their Pontoon account, display a standalone page which redirects to the homepage after the user enables or rejects email updates. This page informs the user of successful account creation and request for updating email communication preferences.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a user successfully creates their Pontoon account, display a standalone page which redirects to the homepage after the user enables or rejects email updates. This page informs the user of successful account creation and requests them to update their email communication preferences.
```

> They should be shown two buttons, one to opt-in to emails or one declining to opt-in. This should not be shown again if the user clicks either of the buttons, but the standalone page for email consent (above) should be shown again upon next login if the user closed their tab/browser.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They should be shown two buttons, one to opt in to emails or one declining to opt in. This should not be shown again if the user clicks either of the buttons, but the standalone page for email consent (above) should be shown again upon next login if the user closed their tab/browser.
```

(Section: content)
- Header: "Welcome to Pontoon!"
- Sub-header: "You have successfully created your Pontoon account."
- Body: "Would you like to receive updates related to localization at Mozilla, projects on Pontoon, and updates to the Pontoon platform? This can be changed at any time in your settings."
- Button: "Enable email updates”
- Button: "No, thank you"
- Consent: “By enabling email updates, I’m okay with Mozilla handling my personal information as explained in this <a href="https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/privacy/websites/">Privacy Notice</a>."

## Additional card for tour

As part of new user onboarding, point new users to user preferences and call out the ability to enable email communication preferences.

(Section: content)

> - Header: Stay up to date

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Header: "Stay up to date"
```

Maybe we should use backticks/code instead of quotes for text that represents actual UI text (buttons, field names, etc.)?

- Body: "You can receive updates related to localization at Mozilla, projects on Pontoon, and updates to the Pontoon platform by email. If you'd like to stay up to date, you can enable these emails in your settings."

*Display if user logged in:*
- Button: "Enable email updates"
- Consent: “By enabling email updates, I’m okay with Mozilla handling my personal information as explained in this <a href="https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/privacy/websites/">Privacy Notice</a>."

## Unsubscribe page

> Legal regulations (e.g. CAN-SPAM act) have specific requirements to include an unsubscribe link in commercial email messages to manage email preferences without requiring a log-in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Legal regulations (e.g. CAN-SPAM act) have specific requirements to include an unsubscribe link in commercial email messages to manage email preferences without requiring a login.
```

> As a user I can:

Reviewer 2: This section is different from the rest of the specs. 

I think we need to call out the various part of the page, including what text and options we're going to display.

- Access my unique/personal unsubscribe page through a link without logging in. The link would typically be included with non-transactional emails from Pontoon as an “Unsubscribe” link in the footer.
  - Link technical specs:
  1) Pontoon generates a random unique identifier and assigns it to each user. The algorithm doesn't use any existing user data to generate the ID, which needs to be sufficiently complex to avoid a potential attacker guessing.
  2) The unsubscribe page can be accessed without login. If a user ID is not provided, or it's incorrect, it will display an error message.
  3) Unsubscribe links in emails will include the user's unique identifier in the URL to correctly identify the user.
- All options are managed from a single page; I do not need to navigate from the page linked in the email to manage subscriptions.
- Unsubscribe from all emails with a single button.

> - Subscribe for emails with a single button

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Subscribe for emails with a single button.
```
